<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Placeholder</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-3" epub:type="chapter">
		<header>
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Private Life of a Prince</p>
			</hgroup>
<p epub:type="bridgehead">
Principles by which he is influenced—irresponsibility—impatience of control—habits of dissipation—ignorance—dislike of truth—dislike of justice.—Pitiable situation of princes.
</p>
</header>

<p>Such is the culture&#59; the fruit that it produces may easily be conjectured.  The fashion which is given to the mind in youth, it ordinarily retains in age&#59; and it is with ordinary cases only that the present argument is concerned.  If there have been kings, as there have been other men, in the forming of whom particular have outweighed general causes, the recollection of such exceptions has little to do with the question, whether monarchy be, generally speaking, a benefit or an evil.  Nature has no particular mould in which she forms the intellects of princes&#59; monarchy is certainly not <I>jure divino</I>&#59; and of consequence, whatever system we may adopt upon the subject of natural talents, the ordinary rate of kings, will possess, at best, but the ordinary rate of human understanding.  In what has been said, and in what remains to say, we are not to fix our minds upon prodigies, but to think of the species as it is usually found.</p>

<p>But, though education for the most part determines the character of the future man, it may not be useless to follow the disquisition a little further.  Education, in one sense, is the affair of youth&#59; but, in a stricter and more accurate sense, the education of an intellectual being can terminate only with his life.  Every incident that befalls us, is the parent of a sentiment, and either confirms or counteracts the preconceptions of the mind.</p>

<p> Now the causes that acted upon kings in their minority, continue to act upon them in their maturer years.  Every thing is carefully kept out of sight, that may remind them they are men. </p>

<p> Every means is employed which may persuade them, that they are of a different species of beings, and subject to different laws of existence.  &quot;A king,&quot; such at least is the maxim of absolute monarchies, &quot;though obliged by a rigid system of duties, is accountable for his discharge of those duties only to God.&quot;  That is, exposed to a hundredfold more seductions than ordinary men, he has not, like them, the checks of a visible constitution of things, perpetually, through the medium of the senses, making their way to the mind.  He is taught to believe himself superior to the restraints that bind ordinary men, and subject to a rule peculiarly his own.  Everything is trusted to the motives of an invisible world&#59; which, whatever may be the estimate to which they are entitled in the view of philosophy, mankind are not now to learn, are weakly felt by those who are immersed in splendour or affairs, and have little chance of success, in contending with the impressions of sense, and the allurements of visible objects.</p>

<p> It is a maxim generally received in the world, &quot;that every king is a despot in his heart,&quot; and the maxim can seldom fail to be verified in the experiment.  A limited monarch, and an absolute monarch, though in many respects different, approach in more points than they separate.  A monarch strictly without limitation is perhaps a phenomenon that never yet existed.  All countries have possessed some check upon despotism, which, to their deluded imaginations, appeared a sufficient security for their independence.  All kings have possessed such a portion of luxury and ease, have been so far surrounded with servility and falsehood, and to such a degree exempt from personal responsibility, as to destroy. the natural and wholesome complexion of the human mind.  Being placed so high, they find but one step between them and the summit of social authority, and they cannot but eagerly desire to pass that step.  Having so frequent occasions of seeing their commands implicitly obeyed, being trained in so long a scene of adulation and servility, it is impossible they should not feel some indignation, at the honest firmness that sets limits to their omnipotence.  But to say, &quot;that every king is a despot in his heart,&quot; will presently be shown to be the same thing, as to say, that every king is, by unavoidable necessity, the enemy of the human race.</p>

<p> The principal source of virtuous conduct, is to recollect the absent.  He that takes into his estimate present things alone, will be the perpetual slave of sensuality and selfishness.  He will have no principle by which to restrain appetite, or to employ himself in just and benevolent pursuits.  The cause of virtue and innocence, however urgent, will no sooner cease to be heard than it will be forgotten.  Accordingly, nothing is found more favourable to the attainment of moral excellence than meditation: nothing more hostile than an uninterrupted succession of amusements.  It would be absurd to expect from kings the recollection of virtue in exile or disgrace.  It has generally been observed that, even for the loss of a flatterer or a favourite, they speedily console themselves.  Image after image so speedily succeed in their sensorium that no one leaves a durable impression.  A circumstance which contributes to this moral insensibility is the effeminacy and cowardice which grow out of perpetual indulgence.  Their minds irresistibly shrink from painful ideas, from motives that would awaken them to effort, and reflections that demand severity of disquisition.</p>

<p> What situation can be more unfortunate, than that of a stranger, who cannot speak our language, knows nothing of our manners and customs, and enters into the busy scene of our affairs, without one friend to advise with or assist him?  If anything is to be got by such a man, we may depend upon seeing him instantly surrounded with a group of thieves, sharpers and extortioners.  They will impose upon him the most incredible stories, will overreach him in every article of his necessities or his commerce, and he will leave the country at last, as unfriended, and in as absolute ignorance, as he entered it.  Such a stranger is a king&#59; but with this difference, that the foreigner, if he be a man of sagacity and penetration, may make his way through this crowd of intruders, and discover a set of persons worthy of his confidence, which can scarcely in any case happen to a king.  He is placed in a sphere peculiarly his own.  He is surrounded with an atmosphere, through which it is impossible for him to discover the true colours and figure of things.  The persons that are near him, are in a cabal and conspiracy of their own&#59; and there is nothing about which they are more anxious than to keep truth from approaching him.  The man, who is not accessible to every comer, who delivers up his person into the custody of another, and may, for anything that he can tell, be precluded from that very intercourse and knowledge it is most important for him to possess, whatever name he may bear, is, in reality, a prisoner.</p>

<p> Whatever the arbitrary institutions of men may pretend, the more powerful institutions of our nature, forbid one man to transact the affairs, and provide for the welfare of millions.  A king soon finds the necessity of entrusting his functions to the administration of his servants.  He acquires the habit of seeing with their eyes, and acting with their hands.  He finds the necessity of confiding implicitly in their fidelity.  Like a man long shut up in a dungeon, his organs are not strong enough to bear the irradiation of truth. Accustomed to receive information of the feelings and sentiments of mankind, through the medium of another, he cannot bear directly to converse with business and affairs. Whoever would detach his confidence from his present favourites, and induce him to pass over again, in scrutiny, the principles and data which he has already adopted, requires of him too painful a task.  He hastens from his adviser, to communicate the accusation to his favourite&#59; and the tongue that has been accustomed to gain credit, easily varnishes over this new discovery.  He flies from uncertainty, anxiety and doubt, to his routine of amusements&#59; or amusement presents itself, is importunate to be received, and presently obliterates the tale that overspread his mind with melancholy and suspicion.  Much has been said of intrigue and duplicity.  They have been alleged to intrude themselves into the walks of commerce, to haunt the intercourse of men of letters, and to rend the petty concerns of a village with faction.  But, wherever else they may be strangers, in courts they undoubtedly find a congenial climate.  The intrusive tale-bearer, who carries knowledge to the ear of kings, is, within that circle, an object of general abhorrence.  The favourite marks him for his victim&#59; and the inactive and unimpassioned temper of the monarch soon resigns him to the vindictive importunity of his adversary.  It is in the contemplation of these circumstances that Fenelon has remarked that &quot;kings are the most unfortunate and the most misled of all human beings.&quot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a></p>

<p> But, in reality, were they in possession of purer sources of information, it would be to little purpose.  Royalty inevitably allies itself to vice.  Virtue, in proportion as it has taken possession of any character, is just, consistent and sincere.  But kings, debauched from their birth, and ruined by their situation, cannot endure an intercourse with these attributes.  Sincerity, that would tell them of their errors, and remind them of their cowardice&#59; justice, that, uninfluenced by the trappings of majesty, would estimate the man at his true desert&#59; consistency, that no temptation would induce to part with its integrity&#59; are odious and intolerable in their eyes.  From such intruders, they hasten to men of a pliant character, who will flatter their mistakes, put a varnish on their actions, and be visited by no scruples in assisting the indulgence of their appetites.  There is scarcely in human nature an inflexibility that can resist perpetual flattery and compliance.  The virtues that grow up among us, are cultured in the open foil of equality, not in the artificial climate of greatness.  We need the winds to harden, as much as the heat to cherish us.  Many a mind, that promised well in its outset, has been found incapable to stand the test of perpetual indulgence and ease, without one shock to waken, and one calamity to stop it in its smooth career.</p>

<p> Monarchy is, in reality, so unnatural an institution that mankind have, at all times, strongly suspected it was unfriendly to their happiness.  The power of truth, upon important topics, is such, that it may rather be said to be obscured, than obliterated&#59; and falsehood has scarcely ever been so successful, as not to have had a restless and powerful antagonist in the heart of its votaries.  The man who with difficulty earns his scanty subsistence, cannot behold the ostentatious splendour of a king, without being visited by some sense of injustice.  He inevitably questions, in his mind, the utility of an officer, whose services are hired at so enormous a price.  If he consider the subject with any degree of accuracy, he is led to perceive, and that with sufficient surprise, that a king is nothing more than a common mortal, exceeded by many, and equalled by more, in every requisite of strength, capacity and virtue.  He feels therefore that nothing can be more groundless and unjust, than the supposing that one such man as this, is the fittest and most competent instrument for regulating the affairs of nations.</p>

<p> These reflections are so unavoidable that kings themselves have often been aware of the danger to their imaginary happiness with which they are pregnant.  They have sometimes been alarmed with the progress of thinking, and oftener regarded the ease and prosperity of their subjects as a source of terror and apprehension.  They justly consider their functions, as a sort of public exhibition, the success of which depends upon the credulity of the spectators, and which good sense and courage would speedily bring to contempt.  Hence the well known maxims of monarchical government, that ease is the parent of rebellion&#59; and that it is necessary to keep the people in a state of poverty and endurance in order to render them submissive.  Hence it has been the perpetual complaint of despotism, that &quot;the restive knaves are overrun with ease, and plenty ever is the nurse of faction.&quot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> Hence it has been the lesson perpetually read to monarchs: &quot;Render your subjects prosperous, and they will speedily refuse to labour&#59; they will become stubborn, proud, unsubmissive to the yoke, and ripe for revolt. It is impotence and penury alone that will render them supple, and prevent them from rebelling against the dictates of authority.&quot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a></p>

<p> It is a common and vulgar observation that the state of a king is greatly to be pitied. &quot;All his actions are hemmed in with anxiety and doubt.  He cannot, like other men, indulge the gay and careless hilarity of his mind&#59; but is obliged, if he be of an honest and conscientious disposition, to consider how necessary the time, which he is thoughtlessly giving to amusement, may be, to the relief of a worthy and oppressed individual&#59; how many benefits might, in a thousand instances, result from his interference&#59; how many a guileless and undesigning heart might be cheared by his justice. The conduct of kings is a subject for the severest criticism which the nature of their situation disables them to encounter.  A thousand things are done in their name in which they have no participation&#59; a thousand stories are so disguised to their ear, as to render the truth undiscoverable&#59; and the king is the general scape-goat, loaded with the offences of all his dependents.&quot;</p>

<p> No picture can be more just, judicious and humane than that which is thus exhibited.  Why then should the advocates of antimonarchical principles be considered as the enemies of kings?  They would relieve them from &quot;a load that would sink a navy, too much honour.&quot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> They would exalt them to the happy and enviable condition of private individuals.  In reality, nothing can be more iniquitous and cruel than to impose upon a man the unnatural office of a king.  It is not less inequitable towards him that exercises it, than towards them who are subjected to it.  Kings, if they understood their own interests, would be the first to espouse these principles, the most eager to listen to them, the most fervent in expressing their esteem of the men who undertake to impress upon their species this important truth.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
