<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The defects here alluded to, have been attempted to be rectified in the second edition. It is impossible perhaps so to improve a crude and unequal performance, as to remove every vestige of its original blemish. <a href="preface-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first conviction of this kind, which the author was far from imagining to be so near, was of a journeyman tallow-chandler, January 8, 1793, who, being shown the regalia at the Tower, was proved to have vented a coarse expression against royalty to the person that exhibited them. <a href="preface-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The principles delivered on this subject in the last chapter of Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, are more fully developed in the three first chapters of Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="preface-2.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Addison: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cato</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These remarks will for the most part apply to the English writers upon politics, from Sydney and Locke to the author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rights of Man</i>. The more comprehensive view has been strikingly delineated by Rousseau and Helvetius. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gulliver’s Travels</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Locke on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Government</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, § 1; and Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>, § 91.</p>
					<p>Most of the above arguments may be found much more at large in Burke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vindication of Natural Society</i>; a treatise, in which the evils of the existing political institutions are displayed with incomparable force of reasoning and lustre of eloquence, while the intention of the author was to show that these evils were to be considered as trivial. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the plan of this work it was originally conceived that it was advisable not to press matters of close and laborious speculation in the outset. It appeared as if moral and political philosophy might assume something more than had been usual of a popular form, without deducting from the justness and depth of its investigation. Upon revisal however, it was found that the inferences of the First Book had been materially injured by an overscrupulousness in that point. The fruit of the discovery was this and the following chapter, as they now stand. It is recommended, to the reader who finds himself deterred by their apparent difficulty, to pass on to the remaining divisions of the enquiry. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some persons have of late suggested doubts concerning the propriety of the use of the word mind. An accurate philosophy has led modern enquirers to question the existence of two classes of substances in the universe, to reject the metaphysical denominations of spirit and soul, and even to doubt whether human beings have any satisfactory acquaintance with the properties of matter. The same accuracy, it has been said, ought to teach us to discard the term mind. But this objection seems to be premature. We are indeed wholly uncertain whether the causes of our sensations, heat, colour, hardness and extension (the two former of these properties have been questioned in a very forcible manner by Locke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Human Understanding</i>, the two latter by Berkeley and Hume) be in any respect similar to the ideas they produce. We know nothing of the substance or substratum of matter, or of that which is the recipient of thought and perception. We do not even know that the idea annexed to the word substance is correct, or has any counterpart in the reality of existence. But, if there be any one thing that we know more certainly than another, it is the existence of our own thoughts, ideas, perceptions or sensations (by whatever term we may choose to express them), and that they are ordinarily linked together, so as to produce the complex notion of unity or personal identity. Now it is this series of thoughts thus linked together, without considering whether they reside in any or what substratum, that is most aptly expressed by the term mind; and in this sense the term is intended to be used throughout the following work. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Objections have been started to the use of the word truth in this absolute construction, as if it implied in the mind of the writer the notion of something having an independent and separate existence, whereas nothing can be more certain than that truth, that is, affirmative and negative propositions, has strictly no existence but in the mind of him who utters or hears it. But these objections seem to have been taken up too hastily. It cannot be denied, that there are some propositions which are believed for a time and afterwards refuted; and others, such as most of the theorems of mathematics, and many of those of natural philosophy, respecting which there is no probability that they ever will be refuted. Every subject of enquiry is susceptible of affirmation and negation; and those propositions concerning it, which describe the real relations of things, may in a certain sense, whether we be or be not aware that they do so, be said to be true. Taken in this sense, truth is immutable. He that speaks of its immutability, does nothing more than predict with greater or less probability, and say, “This is what I believe, and what all reasonable beings, till they shall fall short of me in their degree of information, will continue to believe.” <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The term motive is applicable in all cases, where the regular operations of inanimate matter are superseded by the interference of intelligence. Whatever sensation or perception in the mind is capable of influencing this interference, is called motive. Motive therefore is applicable to the case of all actions originating in sensation or perception, whether voluntary or involuntary. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Characteristics</i>; Treatise <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>B.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, § 2. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This distribution is in substance the same as that of Hartley; but is here introduced without any intention to adopt the peculiarities of his phraseology. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations on Man</i>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. § <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>Prop.</abbr> 21. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Milton: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hume’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>; Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The question, whether or not the human mind is capable of forming abstract ideas, has been the subject of much profound and serious disquisition. It is certain that we have a general standard of some sort, in consequence of which, if an animal is presented to our view, we can in most cases decide that it is, or is not, a horse, a man, &amp;tc.; nor is it to be imagined that we should be unable to form such judgements, even if we were denied the use of speech.</p>
					<p>It is a curious fact, and on that account worthy to be mentioned in this place, that the human mind is perhaps incapable of entertaining any but general ideas. Take, for example, a wine glass. If, after this glass is withdrawn, I present to you another from the same set, you will probably be unable to determine whether it is another or the same. It is with a like inattention that people in general view a flock of sheep. The shepherd only distinguishes the features of every one of his sheep from the features of every other. But it is impossible so to individualise our remarks, as to cause our idea to be truly particular, and not special. Thus there are memorable instances of one man so nearly resembling another, as to be able to pass himself upon the wise and all the relatives of this man, as if he were the same.</p>
					<p>The opposition which has been so ingeniously maintained against the doctrine of abstract ideas seems chiefly to have arisen from a habit of using the term idea, not, as Locke has done, for every conception that can exist in the mind, but as constantly descriptive of an image, or picture. The following view of the subject will perhaps serve in some degree to remove any ambiguity that might continue to rest upon it.</p>
					<p>Ideas, considering that term as comprehending all perceptions, both primary, or of the senses, and secondary, or of the memory, may be divided into four classes: 1. perfect. The existence of these we have disproved. 2. imperfect, such as those which are produced in us by a near and careful inspection of any visible object. 3. imperfect, such as those produced by a slight and distant view. 4. imperfect, so as to have no resemblance to an image of any external object. The perception produced in us in slight and current discourse by the words, river, field, are of this nature; and have no more resemblance to the image of any visible object, than the perception ordinarily produced in us by the words, conquest, government, virtue.</p>
					<p>The subject of this last class of ideas is very ingeniously treated by Burke, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Enquiry Into the Sublime</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. He has however committed one material error in the discussion, by representing these as instances of the employment of “words without ideas.” If we recollect that brutes have similar abstractions, and a general conception, of the female of their own species, of man, of food, of the smart of a whip, <abbr>etc.</abbr> we shall probably admit that such perceptions (and in all events they are perceptions, or, according to the established language upon the subject, ideas) are not necessarily connected with the employment of words. <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> of the following Book. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> of this Book. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Common Sense</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The question, how far impartial justice is a motive capable of operating upon the mind, will be found examined at length, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This argument is stated with great clearness in an Essay on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nature of True Virtue</i>, by Jonathan Edwards, author of a celebrated work on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Freedom of the Will</i>. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Appendix, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 138. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“On a dit⁠—que nous avions tous les mêmes droits. J’ignore ce que c’est que les mêmes droits, où il y a inégalité de talens ou de force, et nulle garantie, nulle sanction.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠Raynal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Revolution d’Amérique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rights of Man</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 157. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hume’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise of Government</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. § 119, 122. <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“La souveraineté ne peut être representée, par le même raison qu’elle ne peut être alienée; elle consiste essentiellement dans la volonté générale, et la volonté ne se represente point: elle est la même, ou elle est autre; il n’y a point de milieu. Les deputés du peuple ne sont donc point ses representans, ils ne sont que ses commissaires; ils ne peuvent rien conclure definitivement. Toute loi que le peuple en personne n’a pas ratifiée, est nulle; ce n’est point une loi.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Du Contrat Social</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, etc. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hume’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 159. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We shall be led, in a subsequent branch of this enquiry, to investigate how far either of these measures is inseparable from the maintenance of social order. Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 184. <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“Dans un état libre, tout homme qui est censé avoir une ame libre, doit être gouverné par lui-même.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Esprit des Loix</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sterne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sermons</i>⁠—“Of a Good Conscience.” <a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>P.</abbr> 235. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 144. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-3-7.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Spartan: Logan’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Philosophy of History</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69. <a href="chapter-3-7.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 144. <a href="chapter-4-1.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-4-1.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Page 268. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 258. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“Dans chaque nation il est des momens où les citoyens, incertains du parti qu’ils doivent prendre, et suspendus entre un bon et un mauvais gouvernement, éprouvent la soif de l’instruction, où les esprits, si je l’ose dire, préparés et ameublis peuvent être facilement penétrés de la rosée de la vérité. Qu’en ce moment un bon ouvrage paroisse, il peut opérer d’heureuses réformes: mais cet instant passé, les citoyens, insensibles à la gloire, sont par la forme de leur gouvernement invinciblement entraînés vers l’ignorance et l’abrutissement. Alors les esprits sont la terre endurcie: l’eau de la vérité y tombe, y coule, mais sans la féconder. Tel est l’état de la France. Cette nation avilie est aujourd’hui le mépris de l’Europe. Nulle crise salutaire ne lui rendra la liberté.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">De l’Homme</i>, Préface</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-3.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 144. <a href="chapter-4-3.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-4-3.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shakespeare: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Julius Caesar</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <a href="chapter-4-4.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Apologia</i>, <abbr>Cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. See this subject further pursued in the Appendix. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Vie de Voltaire, par M***</i>. <i xml:lang="fr">A Geneve</i>, 1786. <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. This is probably the best history of this great man which has yet appeared. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>: Life of West. <a href="appendix-4-5.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-4-6.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Emile</i>, <abbr>liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <a href="chapter-4-6.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 171; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 229. <a href="appendix-4-6-1.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vide Appendices to Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="appendix-4-6-2.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader, who is indisposed to abstruse speculations, will find the other members of the treatise sufficiently connected, without an express reference to this and the three following chapters of the present book. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will find the substance of the above arguments in a more diffusive form, in Hume’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding</i>, being the third part of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The argument from the impossibility of free will is treated with great force of reasoning in Jonathan Edwards’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Enquiry Into the Freedom of the Will</i>. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clarke. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hartley. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-8.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The above will be found to be a tolerably accurate description of the hypothesis of the celebrated Hartley. It was unnecessary to quote his words, as it would be foreign to the purpose of the present work to enter into a refutation of any individual writer. The sagacity of Hartley, in having arranged and analysed the phenomena of mind, and shown the practicability of reducing its different operations to a simple principle, cannot be too highly applauded. The reasonings of the present chapter, if just, may be considered as giving farther stability to his principal doctrine, by freeing it from the scheme of material automatism with which it was unnecessarily clogged. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An attempt has been made to calculate these, but there is no reason to believe that the calculation deserves to be considered as a standard of truth. Sensations leave their images behind them, some for a longer and some for a shorter time; so that, in two different instances, the calculation is in one case eight, and in another three hundred and twenty to a second. See Watson <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On Time</i>, <abbr>Ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56, 68. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Particularly Shaftesbury, Butler, Hutcheson and Hume. The active and ardent spirit of the founders of religion, has perhaps always carried them into the liberal system. See <abbr>Matt.</abbr> <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. <abbr>ver.</abbr> 37⁠–⁠41. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 376. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 64. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some persons, friendly to the doctrine of this chapter, have objected to the remark that “upon the system of self-love, there can be no such thing as virtue,” as too broad, or too incautiously expressed. Undoubtedly it was not intended in this place to assert that the different tendencies of actions would not remain upon both systems, or that habits conducive to the general welfare would not deserve to be sedulously cultivated, in ourselves and others, however mean and ignoble might be the motives from which they sprung. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“La plus sublime vertu est negative; elle nous instruit de ne jamais faire du mal à personne.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Emile</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 200. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 240. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 311. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 271. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 434. <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I state the article of taxation as a branch of executive government, since it is not, like law or the declaration of law, a promulgating of some general principle, but is a temporary regulation for some particular emergence. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-2.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois a encore des manières bien désagréables, des expressions ignobles, et de tems en tems le plus mauvais ton. A présent qu’il est à son aise avec moi, il me débite avec confiance toutes les gentillesses qu’on lui a apprises. Tout cela assaisonné de tous les proverbes de Sancho, et d’un gros rire forcé, qui n’est pas le moindre de ses désagrémens. En outre, il est très bavard, grand conteur, et il ment souvent pour se divertir; avec cela la plus grande indifférence pour <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> et <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mde.</abbr> de Chartres, n’y pensant jamais, les voyant froidement, ne désirant point les voir.⁠—Ils étoient l’un et l’autre de la plus grande impolitesse, <em>oui</em> et <em>non</em> tout court, ou un signe de tête, peu reconnoissant, parce qu’ils croient qu’il n’est point de soins, d’attentions, ni d’égards qu’on ne les doive. Ils n’étoit pas possible de les reprendre sans les mettre au désespoir; dans ce cas, toujours des pleurs ou de l’humeur. Ils étoient très douillets, craignant le vent, le froid, ne pouvant, non seulement ni courir ni sauter, mais même ni marcher d’un bon pas, et plus d’une demi-heure. Et <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le duc de Valois ayant une peur affreuse des chiens au point de pâlir et de crier quand il en voyoit un.”</p>
						<p>“Quand on m’a remis ceux que j’ai élevés, ils avoient l’habitude de porter en hiver des gillets, des doubles paires de bas, des grands manchons, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> L’aîné, qui avoit huit ans, ne déscendoit jamais un escalier sans s’appuyer sur le bras d’une on deux personnes. On obligeoit des domestiques de ces enfans à leur rendre les services les plus vils: pour un rhume, pour une légère incommodité, ces domestiques passoient sans cesse les nuits, <abbr>etc.</abbr>”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Leçons d’une Gouvernante à ses Élevés</i>, par <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mde.</abbr> de Sillery Brulart (ci-devant comtesse de Genlis), Tome <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5-2.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Les plus malheureux &amp; les plus aveugles de tous les hommes.</i>” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Télémaque</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. More forcible and impressive description is scarcely anywhere to he found, than that of the evils inseparable from monarchical government, contained in this and the following book of Fenelon’s work. <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Jane Shore</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Si vous mettez les peuples dans l’abondance, ils ne travailleront plus, ils deviendront fiers, indociles, et seront toujours prêts à se revolter: il n’y a que la foiblesse et la misere qui les rendent souples, et qui les empêchent de resister à l’autorité.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠Télémaque, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shakespeare: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry the Eighth</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom Jones</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley earl of Leicester. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cecil earl of Salisbury, lord treasurer; Howard earl of Nottingham, lord admiral, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paine’s Letter to the Republican. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>P.</abbr> 22. <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Burke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reflections</i>. <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>P.</abbr> 9. <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The persons whom you ought to love infinitely more than me, are those to whom you are indebted for your existence.” “Their conduct ought to regulate yours and be the standard of your sentiments.” “The respect we owe to our father and mother is a sort of <em>worship</em>, as the phrase <em>filial piety</em> implies.” “<i xml:lang="fr">Ce que vous devez aimer avant moi sans aucune comparaison, ce sont ceux à qui vous devez la vie.</i>” “<i xml:lang="fr">Leur conduite doit regler la vôtre et fixer votre opinion.</i>” “<i xml:lang="fr">Le respect que nous devons à notre pere et à notre mere est un <em>culte</em>, comme l’exprime le mot <em>piété filiale</em>.</i>”</p>
						<cite xml:lang="fr"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Leçons d’une Gouvernante</i>, Tome <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="fr"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Maximes</i> par <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Le Duc de la Rochefoucault: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">De la Fausseté des Vertus Humaines</i>, par <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Esprit.</i>
						<a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Plutarch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i>; Lives of Caesar and Cicero: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Ciceronis Epistolae ad Atticum</i>, <abbr>Lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <abbr>Epist.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xl</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Considerations sur le Gouvernement de Pologne</i>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-7.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This argument is stated, with great copiousness, and irresistble force of reasoning, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Burke, towards the beginning of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reflections on the Revolution in France</i>. <a href="chapter-5-7.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“Il n’est pas rare qu’il y ait des princes vertueux; mais il est très difficile dans une monarchie que le peuple le soit.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Esprit des Loix</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Tragedy of Douglas</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Tragedy of Douglas</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rights of Man</i>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In reality these appellations are little less absurd than those by which they are superseded. <a href="chapter-5-12.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Taking the average price of labour at one shilling per diem. <a href="chapter-5-13.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The general grounds of this institution have been stated, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. The exceptions which limit its value will be seen in the twenty-third chapter of the present book. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See this subject pursued in <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“Pour qu’un peuple naissant pût goûter les saines maximes de la politique et suivre les regles fondamentales de la raison de l’état, il faudroit que l’effet pût devenir la cause, que l’esprit social, qui doit être l’ouvrage de l’institution, présidât à l’institution même, et que les hommes fussent avant les lois ce qu’ils doivent devenir par elles. Ainsi donc le législateur ne pouvant employer ni la force ni le raisonnement; c’est une nécessité qu’il recour à une autorité d’un autre ordre, qui puisse entrainer sans violence, et persuader sans convaincre.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Du Contrat Social</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Having frequently quoted Rousseau in the course of this work, it may be allowable to say one word of his general merits, as a moral and political writer. He has been subjected to continual ridicule for the extravagance of the proposition with which he began his literary career; that the savage state was the genuine and proper condition of man. It was however by a very slight mistake that he missed the opposite opinion which it is the business of the present enquiry to establish. He only substituted, as the topic of his eulogium, the period that preceded government and laws, instead of the period that may possibly follow upon their abolition. It is sufficiently observable that, where he describes the enthusiastic influx of truth, that first made him a moral and political writer [in his second letter to Malesherbes], he does not so much as mention his fundamental error, but only the just principles which led him into it. He was the first to teach, that the imperfections of government were the only perennial source of the vices of mankind; and this principle was adopted from him by Helvetius and others. But he saw further than this, that government, however reformed, was little capable of affording solid benefit to mankind, which they did not. This principle has since (probably without being suggested by the writings of Rousseau) been expressed with great perspicuity and energy, but not developed, by Thomas Paine, in the first page of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Common Sense</i>.</p>
					<p>Rousseau, notwithstanding his great genius, was full of weakness and prejudice. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Emile</i> deserves perhaps, upon the whole, to be regarded as one of the principal reservoirs of philosophical truth as yet existing in the world; though with a perpetual mixture of absurdity and mistake. In his writings expressly political, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Du Contrat Social</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Considérations sur la Pologne</i>, the superiority of his genius seems to desert him. To his merits as an investigator, we should not forget to add that the term eloquence is perhaps more precisely descriptive of his mode of composition than of that of any other writer that ever existed. <a href="chapter-5-15.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This argument is the great common place of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Burke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reflections on the Revolution in France</i>, and of a multitude of other works, ancient and modern, upon the subject of government. <a href="chapter-5-15.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-15.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Du Contrat Social</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-5-16.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will easily perceive that the pretences, by which the people of France were instigated to a declaration of war, in April 1792, were in the author’s mind in this and the two following articles. Nor will a few lines be misspent in this note, in stating the feelings of a dispassionate observer, upon the wantonness with which they have appeared ready, upon different occasions, to proceed to extremities. If policy were in question, it might be doubted, whether the confederacy of kings would ever have been brought into action against them, had it not been for their precipitation; and it might be asked, what impression they must expect to find produced upon the minds of other states, by their intemperate commission of hostility? But that equal humanity, which prescribes to us, never, by a hasty interference, to determine the doubtful balance in favor of murder, is a superior consideration, in comparison with which policy is scarcely worthy to be named. <a href="chapter-5-16.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These chapters were written during the month of September 1792, before the intelligence of Dumouriez’s success, and while the heart of every lover of liberty ached for the event of the campaign. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i>Ciceronis <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lucullus</i>, sive <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Academicorum</i> Liber Secundus, <abbr class="eoc">init.</abbr></i>
						<a href="chapter-5-19.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 4. <a href="chapter-5-21.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161; <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 178. <a href="chapter-5-21.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 4. <a href="chapter-5-21.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145; <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hume’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This objection will be fully discussed in the eight book of the present work. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word parish, is here used, without regard to its origin, and merely in consideration of its being a word, descriptive of a certain small portion of territory, whether in population or extent, which custom has rendered familiar to us. <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such is the idea of the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gulliver’s Travels</i> [Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>], a man who appears to have had a more profound insight into the true principles of political justice, than any preceding or contemporary author. It was unfortunate, that a work of such inestimable wisdom failed at the period of its publication, from the mere playfulness of its form, in communicating adequate instruction to mankind. Posterity only will be able to estimate it as it deserves. <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 205. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gulliver’s Travels</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mably, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">de la Législation</i>, <abbr>Liv.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">des Etats Unis d’Amérique</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">Lettre</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will consider this as the language of the objectors. The most eminent of the Greek philosophers were, in reality, distinguished from all the other teachers by the fortitude with which they conformed to the precepts they taught. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 234. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 206. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the following Book. <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rights of Man</i>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>P.</abbr> 315, 316. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68. <a href="chapter-6-8.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The substance of these arguments may be found in Burke’s Speech on Oeconomical Reform. <a href="chapter-6-9.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-6-9.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, throughout. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 7. <a href="chapter-7-3.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Beccaria, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Dei Delitti e delle Pene</i>. <a href="chapter-7-3.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="it">
						<p>“Questa è una di quelle palpabili verità, che per una maravigliosa combinazione di circostanze non sono con decisa sicurezza conosciute, che da alcuni pochi pensatori uomini d’ogni nazione, e d’ogni secolo.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Dei Delitti e delle Pene</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7-4.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-4.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="it">
						<p>“Questa [l’intenzione] dipende dalla impressione attuale degli oggetti, e dalla precedente disposizione della mente: esse variano in tutti gli uomini e in ciascun uomo colla velocissima successione delle idee, delle passioni, e delle circostanze.” <i xml:lang="en">He adds</i>, “Sarebbe dunque necessario formare non solo un codice particolare per ciascun cittadino, ma una nuova legge ad ogni deltitto.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Dei Delitti e delle Pene</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-7-4.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 197. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 150. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howard. <a href="chapter-7-6.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The institution of personal slavery has, within a few years, made a considerable progress in the island of Great Britain. The first step was that of sending criminals, whose guilt was of an inferior description, to raise ballast from the bed of the Thames. The second step, more serious in its nature, appears to have resulted from the well intended, but misguided, philanthropy of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howard. This consisted in the erecting jails of solitary confinement in various parts of the country. The prisoners in these jails spend a large proportion of their time shut up in silent and dreary cells, like so many madmen. The rest of their time is employed in what is called hard labour, under the inspection of certain ignorant and insolent taskmasters. It is asserted that, in one of these jails (Clerkenwell New Prison), its unfortunate tenants are engaged for five hours in each day in trundling a wheelbarrow round in a circle. The cruelty of this Opposition is inexpressibly heightened by its imprudent lawlessness. From this instance we may perceive that the inventiveness of tyranny did not perish with the race of Dionysii. Cases of this sort it is our duty, as citizens, to notice, that the chance of their existing without the knowledge of those to whose province their superintendence belongs, may be removed. <a href="chapter-7-6.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Particularly <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-7.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<i xml:lang="la">Summum jus summa injuria.</i>
						<a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 182. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65. <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 169. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 167. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 441. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71, 72. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71, 72. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>, <abbr>ver.</abbr> 21: Acts, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>ver.</abbr> 44, 45. See also Swift’s Sermon on Mutual Subjection. <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 301. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 219. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, passim. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 427. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>App.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>p.</abbr> 439. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>p.</abbr> 438. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 430. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Burke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reflections</i>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 430. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>p.</abbr> 453. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This idea is to be found in an <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on the Right of Property in Land</i>, published about twelve years ago by an ingenious inhabitant of North Britain, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Sect.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 38, 39. The reasonings of this author have sometimes considerable merit, though he has, by no means, gone to the source of the evil.</p>
					<p>It might be amusing to some readers, to recollect the authorities, if the citation of authorities were a proper mode of reasoning, by which the system of accumulated property is openly attacked. The best known is Plato in his treatise of a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Republic</i>. His steps have been followed by Sir Thomas More in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Utopia</i>. Specimens of very powerful reasoning on the same side, may be found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gulliver’s Travels</i>, particularly Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. Mably, in his book <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">De la Législation</i>, has displayed at large the advantages of equality, and then quits the subject in despair, from an opinion of the incorrigibleness of human depravity. Wallace, the contemporary and antagonist of Hume, in a treatise entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Various Prospects of Mankind, Nature and Providence</i>, is copious in his eulogium of the same system, and deserts it only from fear of the earth becoming too populous: see below, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. The great practical authorities are Crete, Sparta, Peru and Paraguay. We should swell the list to an inconvenient size, if we added examples where an approach only to these principles was attempted, and authors who have incidentally confirmed a doctrine, so interesting and clear as never to have been wholly eradicated from any human understanding.</p>
					<p>It would be trifling to object that the systems of Plato and others are full of imperfections. This rather strengthens their authority; since the evidence of the truth they maintained was so great, as still to preserve its hold on their understandings, though they knew not how to remove the difficulties that attended it. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>p.</abbr> 458. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on Property</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Sect.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, par. 35. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>, <abbr>ver.</abbr> 21. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, § 3. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> I, <abbr>p.</abbr> 424. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 435. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> I, <abbr>p.</abbr> 426. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> I, <abbr>p.</abbr> 426. <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The great champion of this doctrine is Mandeville. It is not however easy to determine, whether he is seriously, or only ironically, the defender of the present system of society. His principal work [<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fable of the Bees</i>] is highly worthy the attention of every man, who would learn profoundly to philosophise upon human affairs. No author has displayed, in stronger terms, the deformity of existing abuses, or proved more satsifactorily how inseparably these abuses are connected together. Hume [<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>; Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.] has endeavoured to communicate to the Mandevilian system his own lustre and brilliancy of colouring. But it has unfortunately happened, that what he adds in beauty he has subtracted from profoundness. The profoundness of Hume, which has never been surpassed, and which ranks him with the most illustrious and venerable of men, is for the most part the profoundness of logical distinction, rather than of moral analysis. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 484. <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="appendix-8-8.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have no authority to quote for this expression but the conversation of Doctor Price. I am happy to find upon enquiry, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> William Morgan, the nephew of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Price, and editor of his works, distinctly recollects to have heard it from his uncle. <a href="appendix-8-8.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 288. <a href="appendix-8-8.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="appendix-8-8.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Smith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wealth of Nations</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="appendix-8-8.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wallace: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Various Prospects of Mankind, Nature, and Providence</i>, 1761. <a href="chapter-8-9.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 503. The authors, who have published their conjectures respecting the possibility of extending the term of human life are many. The most illustrious of these is probably lord Bacon; the most recent is Condorcet, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Outlines of a History of the Progress of the Human Mind</i>, published the first appearance of this work. These authors however are inclined to rest their hopes rather upon the growing perfection of art, than, as it is here done, upon the immediate and operation of an improved intellect. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, § 2. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 402. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 410. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shakespeare: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Macbeth</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <a href="appendix-8-9.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 243. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>; Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Addison’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cato</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 61. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>P.</abbr> 538. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whilst this sheet is in the press for the third impression, I receive the intelligence of the death of Burke, who was principally in the author’s mind, while he penned the preceding sentences. In all that is most exalted in talents, I regard him as the inferior of no man that ever adorned the face of earth; and, in the long record of human genius, I can find for him very few equals. In sublety of discrimination, in magnitude of conception, in sagacity and profoundness of judgement, he was never surpassed. But his characteristic exceilencies were vividness and justness of painting, and that boundless wealth of imagination that adorned the most ungrateful subjects, and heightened the most interesting. Of this wealth he was too lavish; and, though it is impossible for the man of taste not to derive gratification from almost every one of his images and metaphors while it passes before him, yet their exuberance subtracts, in no considerable degree, from that irresistibleness and rapidity of general effect, which is the highest excellence of composition. No impartial man can recall Burke to his mind, without confessing the granduer and integrity of his feelings of morality, and being convinced that he was eminently both the patriot and the philanthropist. His excellencies however were somewhat tinctured with a vein of dark and saturnine temper; so that the same man strangely united a degree of the rude character of his native island, with an urbanity and a susceptibility of the tinder affections, that have rarely been paralleled. But his principal defect consisted in this; that the false estimate as to the things entitled to our deference and admiration, which could alone tender aristocracy with whom he lived, unjust to his worth, in some degree infected his own mind. He therefore sought wealth and plunged in expense, instead of cultivating the simplicity of independence; and he entangled himself with a petty combination of political men, instead of reserving his illustrious talents unwarped, for the advancement of intellect, and the service of mankind. He unfortunately has left us a memorable example, of the power of a corrupt system of government, to undermine and divert from their genuine purposes, the noblest faculties that have yet been exhibited to the observation of the world. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 426. <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
